# An Empire of Elves Treatise

- [An Empire of Elves Treatise](#an-empire-of-elves-treatise)
  - [Elven Realm](#elven-realm)
    - [Leadership of the Realms](#leadership-of-the-realms)
    - [Defense of the Realm](#defense-of-the-realm)
      - [Magical Defenses](#magical-defenses)
      - [The Akh'Faer (Magical Artillery)](#the-akhfaer-magical-artillery)
      - [The Akh'Velahr (Infantry)](#the-akhvelahr-infantry)
      - ["The Wing & Horn" (Airforce & Cavalry)](#the-wing--horn-airforce--cavalry)
    - [Culture](#culture)
      - [Arts of the Realm](#arts-of-the-realm)
      - [Appearance & Dress](#appearance--dress)
    - [Settlements and Buildings](#settlements-and-buildings)
    - [Transportation Types](#transportation-types)
    - [{CAPITAL_CITY}](#capital_city)
      - [Defenses of {CAPITAL_CITY}](#defenses-of-capital_city)
  - [Magic of the People](#magic-of-the-people)
    - [Elven Attitudes and Beliefs on Magic](#elven-attitudes-and-beliefs-on-magic)
    - [High Magic](#high-magic)
      - [The Theories of High Magic](#the-theories-of-high-magic)
      - [The Purpose of High Magic](#the-purpose-of-high-magic)
      - [High Magic Loss or Abuse](#high-magic-loss-or-abuse)
    - [The Forms of High Magic](#the-forms-of-high-magic)
      - [Rituals of Solitude](#rituals-of-solitude)
      - [Rituals of Complement](#rituals-of-complement)
      - [Rituals of Myriad](#rituals-of-myriad)
      - [Ritual Supporters](#ritual-supporters)
      - [Ritual Wards](#ritual-wards)
    - [To Wield High Magic](#to-wield-high-magic)
      - [Education and Learning](#education-and-learning)

## Elven Realm

### Leadership of the Realms

- ***The Coronal:*** As in all elven kingdoms, one Coronal rules over all, as the "speaker among the trees with Corellon's voice and bidding." The Coronal's position is a monarchical one, though there is no automatic inheritance of the title upon the death or passing west of a previous Coronal. An heir is only accepted by the ancient ritual of blade-rite - if he or she can survive drawing the *Rulers' Blade* of {REALM}, one of the three special *elfblades* created just for determining the positions of the three most powerful founding noble families of {REALM}. In the course of {REALM}'s history, only one has not survived the ritual to gain the throne of the Coronal: Divisav Irithyl, an ill-fated and greedy son of First Coronal Kahvoerm Irithyl. Once an heir completes the blade-rite ritual successfully, he or she becomes Coronal, and the Coronal's word is law among elves.
- ***Noble Families and the Nobles' Council:*** Below the Coronal, there are the local rulers of Semberholme, the Council of Trees, and various clan leaders of individual sites across {REALM}. Each rules the particular settlement as the Coronal rules over all. However, their powers are strictly limited to their particular settlement and its established territories. While within the borders of another settlement or among the neutral territories between the colonies, that leader or leaders cannot overrule any edicts of a ruling noble of that settlement or the Coronal. All of these individual leaders are among the heads of the noble families of the elves, the senior families that originally settled Arcorar. The noble heads all sit on the Nobles' Council at {CAPITAL_CITY}, where they discuss and debate individual settlements' policies or those of the Coronal of {REALM}. Once a year, the Coronal is obliged to meet with the Nobles' Council and address their concerns. He is in no way obligated to follow the wishes of the Nobles' Council other than by his own desire to keep peace and unity among his elven subjects.
- ***High Mages:*** While little interested in the politics and power plays of ruling {REALM}, the High Mages by their very nature hold much influence among the People. Their power and wisdom carries much weight with the Coronal, and merely the suggestion that a decision might be harmful to the Weave and the elves' lifeblood is enough to sway nobles and Coronals alike. One of the first decisions made by the First Coronal of {REALM} was to make the Coronal answerable to the High Mages, if he should abuse his power and authority. While the nobles would have preferred the Coronal be answerable to a more political body such as themselves, they understood (as all elves do) this move was done to prevent the very things that sparked the Crown Wars.
- ***The Elven Court:*** There is also a variable fourth ruling body of elves among the leadership of {REALM}: the Elven Court. Long past being a physical site, the Elven Court is now effectively a communion of various nobles, the Coronal, the High Mages, and the various elven priesthoods of {REALM} with ancestral spirits among the trees. It is now only convened either ceremonially once every five centuries or as needed in times of great dissension among the elves. Elven Courts were convened twice during the Sixth Rysar (one Rysar envelops the reign of a specific ruler), but had less to do with the direct ruling of {REALM} and more with how the elves could survive the expansion of the other races and how to live in alliance with them.

### Defense of the Realm

- The "Defender by Arm" is the official title of the elf casually known as the Arms-Major of {REALM} and the commander of the primary armed forces for the realm at large. Formally the wielder of the *Warblade*. Suffice it to say, aside from the blade of office, the Arms-Major's job has changed little in millennia: Command the Akh'Velahr ("Army of Might"), the martial forces throughout {REALM}'s settlements and woods.
- The title for the commander of the magical defenses and forces for {CAPITAL_CITY} and the realm is the "Defender by Art," and this elf wields the *Artblade*. This wizard is also known commonly as the Spell-Major of {REALM}, and each title-bearer has gained other names and honorifics over the centuries. The Major's primary concern is the upkeep of the magical defenses throughout the wooded nation. She also commands the Akh'Faer ("Army of Art"), the military wizards that act in concert with all branches of the regular army. Partially by tradition and happenstance, all 16 Spell-Majors have been females, though they have come from all elf races (including one aquatic elf and three green elves, despite their normal avoidance of wizards' magic).
- The thankless task of being the secondary commanders of the military forces fell to the Captains of each branch and the two greater Captains directly over them, the Arms-Captain and Spell-Captain. While the second most powerful post in both the Akh'Velahr and the Akh'Faer, this position rarely resulted in direct ascensions to the Majors' positions. More often, it led to death as the lesser captains and other officers (or their families) often sought to rise in position and plotted against those in the higher captaincies.

#### Magical Defenses

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While many expect the forest of {REALM} and celebrated {CAPITAL_CITY} to be riddled with magical defenses against attack, they are truthfully quite few and far between. However, as humans are wont to overlook, the simpler, lesser solutions are often the most effective.

- Should any drow touch the surface lands within the tree-line of {REALM}, their footprints, handprints, or any types of contact darken the grass and loam beneath their touch to a deeper shade of the same color. This simple, widespread magic allows easy tracking of the elven race enemy within this empire. This coloration change lasts for 24 hours beyond the last contact.
- An appeal to Rillifane (taught to all elven children) while planting a small flower bulb anywhere in the woods of {REALM} shows the lost their way home. The appeal causes the flower to magically grow within moments of closing dirt around it. This occurs in any season, provided the bulb is buried under at least three inches of loose dirt. The flower grows up to a modest size, and its petals, thorns, or leaves point the general direction toward the planter's destination, while the number of white (or alternate color from the flower's norm) petals or details tell how many miles away it is. These magical flowers only last in that shape for a round, and then they simply return to a standard form, though they do not die quickly unless planted in winter.
- Before the opening of {REALM} to N'Tel'Quess (non-elves), the elves maintained magical teleportation fields that served to confuse many invaders in the forest. If a creature was not a native of {REALM} woods (the sylvan races) or an elf, the invisible fields would teleport that creature and any creatures within 100 feet of it 500 yards in a random direction and turn them around in a direction away from any settlement. Most folk continue traveling, unaware of the teleport, and never find the heart of the wood or any of the larger elven towns. After the opening of the woods and the raising of the mythal at {CAPITAL_CITY}, only those fields surrounding Semberholme and Old Elven Court were maintained as originally set; most were dissolved, but others were reworked to simply repel goblins, orcs, ogres, giants, and their ilk.
- Whether this is a High Magic effect, a wish established by the Seldarine gods, or a natural effect of the woods, all ogres (but not orcs or goblins) are at -1 penalties against their Morale Checks the entire time they are within the tree-line of {REALM}.

#### The Akh'Faer (Magical Artillery)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Art Tower of Castle {CAPITAL_CITY} is the central headquarters of the Army of Art. Dominated by moon and gold elves, this army contains at least 300 wizards between 4th and 8th level as the primary troops, 100 junior officers (9th to 12th level), and 50 senior officers (13th level +) below the Wizard-Major and her second. Among these ranks, there are many types of wizards. Any Akh'Faern (member of the Army of Art) has access to certain magical items provided from the army stockpiles. All troops bear a ring identifying them as Akh'faern, and these minor items allow the wearer a +1 to saving throws against spells. Offensive wands of lightning, frost, flame extinguishing, or magic missiles are the norms allotted to junior officers; senior officers might gain rods of absorption, alertness, or security while on maneuvers or in a combat situation.

#### The Akh'Velahr (Infantry)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;There are more than 3,000 elves in the standing army of {REALM}, and nearly every able fighter among {REALM}'s populace (elf or N'Tel'Quess) would gladly join the fray if needed in times of crisis.

- The scouts are led by Otaerhyn Hawksong, the second-in-command of the Akh'Velahrn. The bulk of the scouts are green elves, and their skills as archers, rangers, and spies (rogues, thieves) are invaluable for reconnaissance and quick-strikes against minor invasions in the forest. Most of the scouts wear leather or no armor, boots and cloaks of elvenkind, and all arm themselves with bows, daggers, and a variety of weapons.
- The warriors and common foot soldiers of the army comprise more than two-thirds of its total strength.The army itself has standard long swords, broad swords, shields, and spears for weaponry; the army's common armor varies from studded leather to chain or (rare instances) scale mail. The officers have improved weapons, including some magical weapons, and they all have elven chain mail or better armor.
- The Protectors are the elite troops and those specifically assigned to defending {REALM}'s nobility. Comprised almost entirely of gold elves, these troops tend to be bladesingers, higher-level rangers, or fighters. In fact, many of the Protectors opted to remain as rank-and-file among the elite rather than become officers of the lower-status common army. Almost all Protectors have elven chain mail, though the officers among them have elven plate mail (strong, light plate mail that allows elves to cast spells from within it). The standard weapons for the elite (long bow, spear or other polearm, long sword or broad sword) are all at least of +1 enchantments. A sign of prestige among the elven nobility of {CAPITAL_CITY} is an honor guard of personal Protectors, rather than standard mercenary guards from the common army.

#### "The Wing & Horn" (Airforce & Cavalry)

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While technically part of the Akh'Velahr, the Wing and Horn are the elite cavalry troops that are accorded a certain amount of autonomy by {REALM}'s Captain due to their specialized skills.

- (Inactive for the last 500 years) The most elite and the primary officers of Wing & Horn are the dragonriders. Numbering five in all, they were once far more numerous in the early days of Arcorar. Each dragonrider either commands a Wing (flying) or Horn (grounded) cavalry unit.
- Hippogriff-riders are the most common of the cavalry troops of Wing. Numbering about 250 riders and mounts at any given time, they are impressive in their tight regimented formations and attack patterns. As the slowest among the flying cavalry, they rely on group tactics and teamwork to defeat their foes. Their Sixstar Maneuver (named after the site in {CAPITAL_CITY}) is their most famous, where six hippogriffs pilot into positions in which all six riders can perform lance charges and pull away safely from each other and their outflanked target.
- Next among the cavalry of wing are the pegasus-riders. One hundred pegasi from the herds among {REALM} and the northern lands west of the Dragon Sea fly at the ready with their exclusively gold elf riders. With the Lady Fieryat's extensive training of them, riders are capable of brief maneuvers at a +1 Maneuverability Class once an hour, with a successful NWP check.
- The smallest and newest of the Wing cavalry, the green and moon elves' giant eagle mounts, amount to no more than 30 birds and riders and most are limited to the southern forests. When in full attack formation, they are a savage, blood-chilling sight. Still, while many elves and all N'Tel'Quess are in awe of their triumphs, many elder elves shake their heads at their recklessness and lack of discipline.
- There are also rare inclusions among the Wing cavalry of wyvernriders or griffonriders. While these spectacular mounts and their riders were welcome for their offensive capabilities, they were problematic among the other cavalry due to the difficult-to-restrain natural feeding habits. Therefore, if wyverns or griffons were among the army, they often gained solo missions to prevent their feeding on fellow cavalry troops, since both species love pegasi, hippogriffs, unicorns, and other types of horses. Given his own flair for unpredictability, Ievos commands these rogues as well.
- The unicornriders of {REALM} range from 50-100, depending on the season and the location within the forest. While the cavalry may be called all about the forest, no unicorns are found south of Old Elven Court, nor will any enter that area or Tangled Vale without urging from their riders. The unicorns are found in some wandering herds in the northern forests of {REALM}. All unicornriders are female elves, though they are a mix of all the surface breeds.
- The moon horses are the magical mounts exclusive to moon elven fighter/mages (but not bladesingers). These intelligent horses were among the natives of Arcorar long before the elves arrived, and they volunteered their services to aid the elves' defense of the forest. Now, after long millennia, the moon-horse herds are dwindling, and only 20 serve as mounts for their moon elven riders at any given time. Still, they are often set as the shocktroop cavalry, their spells and speed breaking many opposing charges for easy attacks by the unicorn cavalry following them or the hidden scouts' arrows.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All of the Wing & Horn cavalry riders are fighters from 5th to 11th level; some may be fighter/mages of up to 9th level in each class. They all are capable of handling either ground or flying mounts, and their weapons match the type of fighting involved (as noted above). All are armored with leather or elven chain mail. Only Horn cavalry use shields, but all are armed with bows, arrows, at least two spears or some other style of polearm, and some hand-to-hand weapon of personal choice. Lances are known weapons to all cavalry (i.e., required WP), though they are only used against major aerial targets like dragons.

### Culture

#### Arts of the Realm

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unlike most human cultures of {SETTING} before or since, the elves of {REALM} place great value in their arts. Beauty is an intrinsic factor in any elf's life, and the elves embrace beauty in all of its forms and crafts. However, the elves stratify the importance and impact of their arts, and regard the eminence of their artistry in the following order of importance (highest to lowest).

##### Magical Arts

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The Art most near and dear to elves is magic, of course. But while cultures such as the Netherese sought only power and dominance with their spells and magical constructs, the elves sought beauty and closeness with the Weave in their magics. To an elf, it is far less impressive to create another explosive invocation than it is to refine a delicate illusion. In itemcraft, such refined works such as belluth or magical jewelry is more sought after than suits of armor or bracers unless such were crafted with fine details or shaped in such a way as to appear different under elven infravision. To elvenkind, wizards should be true Artists, and the style of casting simply changes the canvas and style of the Art.

##### Music & Song

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Aside from the inherent art of dweomercraft, music and song are highly prized among the elves of {REALM}. The preferred method of historical record among elves, aside from the more cryptic Uvaerenn methods saved for state secrets, was in song. In fact, there are some sages who look to the older elven written languages (the early pictographics or predecessors to Thorass) and theorize that they are less specific words or pictures and more instructions for music, the "letters" indicating notes, stresses, beat, key, and meter, or other factors involved in the song. Despite repeated attempts to gain the help of elves to decipher the elder languages, the language remains a mystery; the elves simply say that "when humanity learns the songs of the ancient elves from its own study, they will reap rewards of true music and knowledge."  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elven ballads are lengthy and filled with endless stories crossing centuries; most N'Tel'Quess do not have the patience to listen to elven songs, but those who do pay attention are gifted with a transcendent experience of melodies matching all the moods of performer, subject, and listeners all. Elves reveal their secrets only to the patient and to the appreciative, and more can be learned of the Realms in a 36-hour-long song than might be learned in 36 months of book-study; all it takes is a keen ear, a knowledge of elvish song-language (which has some mild but important differences to both their written and spoken tongues), and a great attention span.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The elven faculty for music is uncanny in comparison to most other races. Some elves can, with little more than a thought, perform it flawlessly centuries after hearing it only once. They can take nearly any nonelven song and improve it a thousandfold with one performance, at times leaving even a talented composer or songwriter weeping over their own limitations. It is uncertain which Seldarine gift is more precious: their lifeline with magic or their talent for music.

##### Poetry & Writing

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Poetry and writing are crafts close in form and style to music, though the loss of melody is slightly jarring to an elf. Poetry is merely the last refuge of song for those whose voices either are too old to be raised easily in song (for the appropriate length of time for elves, that is) or for those injured elves without the voice to properly sing. Like an elven song, an elvish poem seems long and convoluted, but those with the diligence discover much of the mental processes of elves from the varied word choices; unlike Common, there are often ten or more words in Elvish to express roughly the same word in Common, but each carries a particular meaning by context and a definite connotation singular to each word. In this way, studying elvish poetry can reveal the poet's personal internal feelings about what he wrote, and also what his family/clan/colony feels by how it is written.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Still, those few pitiable elves without a talent for singing or poetry turn to story-writing. Their writing is flawless in terms of their own styles, though elven stories are as hard for N'Tel'Quess to follow as their songs. Most elven stories start at the height of a story's action or the climax, focus on the moral of the story (though they never directly address it, cloaking it always in allegory), and then weave around toward the details that led to the climax while also unveiling the denouement of the story. While many short anecdotal stories can be translated to Common, the best stories cannot be appreciated outside of Elvish. Their written language itself lends to this style of writing, as it can be written not only in present and past tenses for each subject type, but written elvish expands into six more verb tenses of ancient-past, long-past, near-past, immediate-present (rather than the general "now" of the story as it unfolds), near-future, and far-future. While these can be explained in Common, it is far clumsier and less eloquent upon translation. However, as in all elven arts, those with the patience and perseverance stand to reap great rewards of understanding from such works.

##### Sculpture & Shaping

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While dwarves and humans forcefully carve shapes and forms from stone and wood and other materials, the elves used slightly different methods. Granted, they do deign to a small amount of forceful carving to force their medium to the vaguest approximation of what they need, but then their methods differ vastly. This artisans' craft truly tests the patience of an elf, for few other artforms in practice among the elves take centuries to form.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An elven sculptor, or shaper (their literal and more common elven name), approaches each piece separately, choosing the medium by their own mood or need. Then, the medium itself often chooses what it will become, as the elf studies the rock or wood. Elves sculpt and shape either by magic (only if needed in a hurry - less than a year) or an eroding method useful against their material. Shapers use anything to achieve their art:

- Slow-dripping waterfalls are best for rock sculptures, and they move the rock once a month for more than 100 years to allow the stone to wear in the proper places and achieve the shape desired.
- Glass shaping takes much patience, waiting for the viscous liquid to flow, but placement in heated areas and careful shaping as the glass flows over the centuries ensures a quality sculpture. When elves need to sculpt water or wind, glass is the preferred medium.
- Wood shaping is achieved by the patient use of sundrying, wind-wearing, or the creative use and control of termites, woodpeckers, or beavers.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In terms of magical shaping, elves most often use such common spells as *stone shape, transmute rock to mud, lightning bolt, chain lightning, or fireball* to impress changes upon their stone and wood and other works. Many specific and secret magics are developed over time by wizard-shapers for just such purposes, though most remain trade secrets rather than allowing other artists to corrupt the shaping spell or outshine the creators' works.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first half-elf born into a noble elf family of {CAPITAL_CITY}, Arun Maerdrym, was the first wizard and shaper to create Shapers' spells early in the Fourth Century Dalereckoning, which allowed a wizard to create the shape mentally during a casting, and magically create the medium within the presculpted form of the spell (variants of the various *wall of fire/ice/etc.* spells). Some conservative elves disdained both Arun's half-elven nature and his breakthrough in Art and art, refusing to acknowledge the sculpture-work as artistry. Despite many objections, the Coronal commissioned a number of Arun's sculptures; in fact, a unique version of *sculpture of ice* provides the snow sculptures so enjoyed by {CAPITAL_CITY}'s children.

##### Tattoos

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The last of the visual arts the elves embrace and excel in is the tactile finesse of tattoos. Popular primarily among the Sy'Tel'Quessir but certainly not shunned by other elves or N'Tel'Quess, tattoos are the most precise work done among the elves in terms of detail and finework. Depending on the design or the intent of the tattoo, elves can depict anything in a tattoo, the only limit being the size of the person gaining the tattoo. Some elves have clan marks, arcane symbols, or camouflage tattooed on their bodies, while the most amazing work involves small magics that allow tattoos of animals to appear to move and breathe on the person's body. While some human cultures see these tattoos as barbaric, it is the only direct visual representation they can do in such a medium.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In fact, most humans are surprised that there are very few artists of {CAPITAL_CITY} or {REALM} that use the medium of painting, a major art form among humans and other races. In truth, the elves do utilitarian painting among their settlements, but it rarely moves beyond minor coloring of sculptures or camouflaging buildings of the settlement itself. The primary reason this form of artistry isn't practiced among the Tel'Quessir is its rapid degeneration and transience. To most elves, art embraces life, and this barely lasts as long as an elf's adolescence, thereby rendering less than true art in their eyes.

##### Culinary Arts

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In this area, elves are improperly slandered by many races who say their cooking skills and dishes are bland at best and tasteless at worst. While halfling chefs are far more common and more easily understood, elven chefs are appreciated only by other elves, since they cater only to their own priorities. Elves disdain heavy spices, overpowering flavors, or excessive amounts, all factors that N'Tel'Quess seem to rely on in food.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To elves, cooking is the most delicate of arts, requiring one to gauge variables of time, heat, the miscibility of certain flavors, and a food's texture. Elven culinary delights generally involve four senses of sight, smell, taste, and touch/texture; bear in mind that elven senses are far more acute than those of most N'Tel'Quess, so what is pleasurable by minor shifts in color, texture, or smell is most likely to be missed by most who partake. To a refined palate, however, an elven meal is designed to affect moods and invoke memories by the use of certain food textures and spices which affect the metabolism of an elf. Merely a whiff of allspice within a pumpkin soup might be enough to make an elf chuckle as he remembers the comical myth of Aerdrie Faenya creating pumpkins from the heads of slain orcs so elves might show their foes economy by using their heads far more than they ever did.

#### Appearance & Dress

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The style of clothing and dress in {CAPITAL_CITY} strictly depends on the weather and season. Most elves (and quite a few humans) wear loose, flowing garments of diaphanous silks, linens, and cloth of greater finery than lands outside. Gnomes, dwarves, and halflings tend toward leathers and heavier cloth shirts and muslin tunics. In winter, furs are the norm for all, and the style of cut and the rarity of the fur worn depend only on social and monetary status, not race.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In general, only soldiers and guards tend to wear armor in the city; for any others to do so is to suggest either paranoia or a lack of trust in the security of the realm. While elven chain mail is always work of such finery that it can be worn as clothing or beneath other clothes, it is rude to do so.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In keeping with this fostering of trust and the tradition of faith in one's hosts, fashion among the elves and most capital citizens has the heart exposed as often as possible, whether wearing a gown or armor. In fact, bared flesh, especially vulnerable vital areas, is among the criteria for determining fashion in {CAPITAL_CITY}, with more bared flesh suggesting higher degrees of trust and implied safety. Thus, common fashions among elves and others (most often at galas and parties, though prevalent in common garb as well) include open cloaks and robes, wide plunging necklines on garbs for all sexes and races, open sleeves and leggings, and the use of nearly ephemeral cloth in togas, tunics, and other wear.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To some visitors to the Towers of Song, the fashions of {CAPITAL_CITY} are surprising and all-too-suggestive. To any elf and most {CAPITAL_CITY} natives, their cultivated peace and prosperity should be reflected in their lifestyles and clothing. There is also no nudity taboo in the city, at least among the elves and some humans; the dwarves and gnomes, in particular, adhere to their social teachings and do not conform to these elven affectations.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lastly, footwear is among the lighter of fashions, since all the halflings and some elves of {CAPITAL_CITY} prefer to travel barefoot all year round. Green elves primarily are the unshod Tel'Quessir, while the golds never appear in public without some sort of shoes. Of course, creating magical shoes that allow one to hover over ground are an area of fierce fashion and magical competition. In fact, "footwear" magics are the most common of the minor magics of {CAPITAL_CITY}, with over 1,000 minor spells that create magical sparkles or arcane shoes that allow elves to levitate, walk on water or across vertical surfaces, move without even moving ones' feet, etc. The most elaborate display such illusions as wings on one's ankles, dark starlit night skies on one's toenails, or fiery slippers that trail purple flames.

### Settlements and Buildings

  &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In discussing the buildings and structures within any elven settlement, there are generally only six types of buildings to be found in {REALM}, and they follow two primary distinctions based on their locations. Ground dwellings are just that, and are easily found. The tree dwellings of elves range anywhere from 10 feet to 200 or more feet above the forest floor, and some are more obvious than others in terms of camouflaging them within the tree's canopy. Of course, the tree dwellings are all made of wood, while ground dwellings are made of a variety of materials, most often stone-and-wood combinations. While no two edifices look alike in {REALM}, they tend to follow these patterns:

- **Tree Dwelling - Minor:** The tree dwellings of the elves are often platform treehouses, though a few are actually living parts of the tree, hollows shaped by elven magic to create small domiciles such as this. Minor tree dwellings are lesser buildings used as single-family abodes, minor storehouses or weapons caches, or cleverly concealed guard stations for a small contingent of defenders. They rarely consist of more than three rooms, though the minor classification merely suggests the overall size of a place, rather than its importance or its opulence.
- **Tree Dwelling - Major:** like above, these buildings are either among the branches and based on platforms and slings attached to a tree or they are living parts and hollows within and around a tree. Major buildings such as this are multi-leveled residences with a variety of purposes, the primary one being living space for elves and others. Other uses for major tree dwellings include guildhouses, rowhouses (lowest levels are businesses and dwellings above), higher city defenses to supplement any ground forces (i.e., the literal high ground), and other uses.
- **Ground Dwelling - Minor:** Built most often for non-elven settlers or for elves of very old or very young ages, these smaller ground dwellings mimic the purpose of those above in the trees: lesser storehouses, single-family homes, taverns, or stables. With the onset of non-elven settlers into {REALM}, many of the businesses and newer buildings were built of this type. There are also a few minor hollows around or beneath ground level within trees, but these are still considered ground rather than tree dwellings.
- **Ground Dwelling - Major:** These ground-based buildings are often multi-leveled places used as rowhouses, multi-family dwellings, businesses, guildhouses, inns, or festhalls. While often only devoted to a few occupants, many mages' towers among the spires of {REALM} count as Fortified Ground Dwellings - Major.
- **Fortified Dwelling:** This is less a type of structure than an adaption of any of the above dwelling types. If a place is fortified, it simply has greater defenses for a place beyond those designed only to keep out inclement weather (i.e., door, window shutters, etc.). If a place is described as a Fortification, however, it generally means the location is exclusively of military use and purpose, its very location and construction focused to the exclusion of other uses.
- **Grand Building:** Like the Fortified class above, this is not a separate structure style as much as a further description of a building type. Many of these buildings and locations defy any usual descriptions or typology, but they tend toward grand, opulent, and distinctive looks and natures and purposes. Many of the elven constructs summoned up by High Magic are Grand Buildings by their nature and looks. Given the fact that these are usually quite unique buildings, they often are simply described by their own names and folk know the place as a landmark, like the Six Tyryl Towers or Castle {REALM}.

### Transportation Types

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Modes of transportation are important factors in building your settlement as well. How do travelers reach this place? How do people move around within the settlement?

- Tree settlements (or even partially treed settlements) are often interconnected by swinging ropes, suspension bridges, and pathways along stout boughs. Most domiciles and buildings have platforms around them leading to bridges or other transports.
- Ground colonies are obviously intersected by trails and streets, and their paths are often determined by the placement of trees and rocks, which are often left undisturbed in favor of simply winding the trail around. Thus, unless built in a previously cleared area, some cities among {REALM}'s empire have oddly winding streets and paths, and equally meandering trails leading to them.
- One last item of note is the magic of a place. In mixed settlements of tree- and ground-buildings, there are often magical fields and floating discs that levitate folk up into the trees and back down again. These glowing pillars of magic were extremely limited but became nearly commonplace among the more magic-oriented cities of the elves. Other magics for the settlement might include gates to and from the area, linking the few elven cities of {REALM} with others across the Realms.

### {CAPITAL_CITY}

#### Defenses of {CAPITAL_CITY}

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The first lines of defense for {CAPITAL_CITY}, of course, are the protective armies of all {REALM}, the Akh'Velahr and the Akh'Faer. They patrol {REALM}, and they are welcomed into the City of Love, though most of their number remains in the wilds in postings or in other settlements. Only the officers of these armies regularly visit {CAPITAL_CITY}, to report to the Coronal and command their forces from their respective towers in Castle {CAPITAL_CITY}.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The primary defenders of the City, or most specifically the defenders of the Coronal who is the Heart of the City, are the Armathors. Mages and fighters all, these spellguards have two major ranks: those who protect the city at large, preventing disturbances and the like, and those who exclusively protect the Coronal and Castle {REALM}. In all, there are at least 100 Armathors for the city at large and another Honor Spellguard of 20 Armathors for the Coronal's Court. After the Opening and as {CAPITAL_CITY} grew, other races revealed heroes of rare valor, and thus a few scouts (rogues & thieves) also became part of the Armathors' honored corps.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Armathors are under the command of the eight Court Mages, all of whom are highly placed wizard/warriors whose ranks have always been exclusively female. Six are active leaders among the troops while the final two Court Mages are elderly "Court Sages" whose wisdom and constant contact with the Coronal allows for tight communication between Armathors and the Court; these Sages rarely involve themselves with the command structures of the Armathors, and deal only with the High Court Mages' and the Coronal's requests for information. The Court Mages are wizards or multiclass wizards of no less than 12th level, while the Sages are at least 500 years old and of 15th or greater levels. Each of the six active Court Mages commands at least 20 Armathors, with the senior Court Mage as the Honor Guard officer.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Lastly, the two High Court Mages stand at the immediate hand of the Coronal as his primary wizards. This political position allows great freedoms and powers, and they command the city's defenders as the senior commanders over the Court Mages. High Court Mages have always been mages of great power (16th level or greater), but unlike the Court Mages, they are not exclusively women. An open secret among the upper echelons, at least one High Court Mage has always been a secret High Mage, to ensure that the Coronal and his confidante might always be able to counteract even the most powerful of magics brought down on {REALM} or the Coronal's Court. These two wizards carry weight in the Coronal's Court equal to the Spell- and Arms-Captains, though they can never challenge the influence of the Majors.

##### Rank Marks of {REALM}'s Defenders

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;One important note to mention about elven military protocols is the method of rank insignias, Unlike humans' or other cultures where rank and service are temporary and are marked by badges or buttons and the like, elves believe that one who serves in the military is forever in the military. Thus, their service marks for Armathors, Akh'faern, and Akh'velahrn are simple black tattoos emblazoned on the backs of their hands, though each branch has different ranking tattoos that either adapt the service mark or add more tattoos on their palms and forearms.

- The Akh'Velahr tattoos are the smallest and simplest, though they also are the ones with the most changes due to the largest amount of rank permutations among their troops. The initial black tattoo is a stylized sword sigil on the back of the hand for enlisted personnel; once an officer's rank is reached, the sigil is highlighted in blue detailing. Officer's ranks are noted by up to four rings tattooed into one's palm. Once the Akh'velahrn reached kérym rank, the sword sigil tattoo is further detailed and highlighted in green, and with later ranks, the rings on the palm are retouched in silver. The ultimate rank of the Arms-Major sees the black sword sigil retouched in silver without disturbing the blue/green highlights.
- Akh'Faerna proudly wear black lightning sigils on their hand-backs. Once an Akh'faern is an officer, an elaborate and large tattoo of fine azure lines wraps an entire forearm; while in all individual lines, only under close inspection can one actually see that the tattoo is not a solid blue color from wrist to elbow. As ranks progress, a series of up to four interlocking circles can be added lengthwise along this tattoo. The next step into senior officer's levels (faernae, arfaern, Spell-Captain, & Spell-Major) is marked by adding yellow finework among the bluelines of the arm tattoo, turning it green. The next two ranks see concentric lozenges either intersecting the centers of the four rank circles or surrounding all the circles on the outside, all in black. The Spell-Major's tattoos either are magically turned silver on green by the drawing of the Artblade.
- Armathors are all equally marked by a large seven-pointed black star on the backs of their hands. With only four officers' ranks in total (from Teuonor to Aronor to Court Mage to High Court Mage), the permutations are simple. Teuonors have their stars detailed and filled with azure tattoos, which become green upon reaching an Aronor's rank. With the rise to Court Mage status, the black of the original star tattoo is altered to silver, and the rare High Court Mages have that further changed to a gold star beneath the green and blue details.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;"Medals" and awards of valor and honor are available for all branches of these military services, and they are all individual tattoos as well. Among the more famous (and common) of the awards are the Akh'Aegis, a shield-shaped tattoo given to those seriously wounded in the defense of {REALM}; Ister's Star, a six-point star with sparkles in the center of the star and in between each point which was given to any mage who created and gave a spell for his branch of the service; or the Crossed Swords, a sigil of a pair of crossed swords with one outlined and one solid black blade, which showed that this warrior or wizard had fought drow and survived. (In fact, some boastful warriors had their opposite arms tattooed with the Crossed Swords sigil for each drow slain; the Penaal Alosrin was an arrogant warrior with more than 49 of these tattoos along his left arm, chest, and back!)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The ultimate degradation an elf of these services could suffer was demotion or expulsion from the ranks. Removal of the tattoos is not the solution for these situations, but should any officer knowingly betray his duties, stripping of rank and demotion entails changing the rank marks from black to white by magic (whereas it used to mean ritual scarring of the ranks). If the officer's crimes are severe enough, total discharge and exile was often the result in its few occurrences; all the tattooed ranks are magically changed to white, and the larger full-forearm tattoos of the Akh'Faerna go from blue or green to yellow. Thus, the ultimate insult to pay any enlisted personnel would be to call them "White-Hand;" hiding these shaming marks by illusions is also a serious crime in {CAPITAL_CITY}.

## Magic of the People

### Elven Attitudes and Beliefs on Magic

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To elves, magic is less a power or force to manipulate and more an energy source and something that permeates their entire existence. To separate elves from their magic is to pull a fish from water or rob a scholar of his ability to read. To an elf, magic is as everpresent as life itself, and the use of it in common spells as well as High Magic is almost as much a religious experience as communing with the Seldarine. Perhaps the elves' affinity for magic helps explain their longevity and other special abilities, though the elves prefer not to comment.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elves understand the Weave, the mystical balance of forces and energies that govern magic on {PLANET}, and even those elves whose preferences lie with swords can feel it surrounding them at all times. As humans strive to understand the nature of elven nightvision, some have theorized that elven eyes are attuned to the Weave, and in darkness they see the energy of untapped magic flowing through and around objects, people, and places.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Magic is as natural a thing to elves as water, air, and the earth below. It is yet another abundant natural asset available to elves in this world, and they use it without disruption, as they do any other resource. Just as humans learned to use water and wind to turn mill wheels, elves tap magic and cast spells to make their lives easier as well. Humans embrace the physical world, relying almost entirely on physical tools and physical solutions; elves embrace both worlds, using physical and magical tools and like resolutions.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Like the other natural resources of {PLANET}, magic has been a commodity to be respected, employed in measure and with care, and used in harmony with the other forces of nature. Whether they witnessed abuses of this power in the past or simply had the foresight and wisdom to know not to misuse the power of magic, the elves have carefully guarded how and where magic was used. Numerous ancient elven treatises discuss the boon of magic and postulate that magic is in and of itself a test of character for the wielder and his race. If wizardry can be used without abuse, it is power granted freely with little divine control or intervention (unlike priests' magic, which is doled out by the gods' whims and strictures). Prom this perspective, magic is an asset granted only to those mature races capable of using it responsibly.

### High Magic

> *"Where Art is life, Lore is thought, and Song is beauty; Arselu'Tel'Quess is all three in their immaculate forms yet combined into a new, purer whole. No N'Tel'Quess can conceive of achieving such a union with life, thought, and beauty to weave such wonders, for only the People can touch the Weave in this way. I realize some of the People and even some savant humans seem to cast the same magics, but these are mere effigies of the true magics they mime. The humans have copied the replica spells, but they have never felt the Art sing in their breath, their pulse, and their heart as the Selu'taar do. This you will learn, youngling, or forever know the loss of such resplendence in Art."*

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Elven High Magic, the rarest and most wonderful of magic still practiced on {PLANET} today, is called Arselu'Tel'Quess, or the "Great Art of the People." High Magic is nearly a myth among the N'Tel'Quess, referred to erroneously as Old Magic or Ritual Magic. In truth, it is both and neither, as these simple concepts fail to embrace what High Magic truly is. True, it is old, for the elves practiced this magic long before they ever trod the loam in {REALM}. Likewise, it is ritual, for the ceremonies of High Magic are as necessary as elven blood to attune what is a communing flow of forces among the elven caster or casters and the Weave itself. Casters of this powerful Art are secretly called Selu'taar, the Art's Disciples, or the High Mages. No non-elf can withstand the powers involved in High Magic, and elves are equally in awe and fear of such forces and their conduits, for most of them are also found wanting by the energies and disciplines of Selu'Tel'Quess.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;High Magic is known to the elves, though its practices and practitioners are secret (or, at least, not publicly acknowledged). As an "open secret," High Magic is never discussed, nor are High Mages officially recognized as anything other than wizards; given the elven nature to share and commune, the mysteries of High Magic cannot be shared, and thus it is better to be left unmentioned among the elves, rather than allow it to be a divisive power to be grasped. It is as much a power beyond the reach of mages as magic is above the prying reach of a thief. While most elves are unaware of the identities of many High Mages, some have been publicly witnessed as such practitioners, such as the Srinshee. Despite a lack of official status and acknowledgement, "known" or suspected High Mages are granted greater respect due to their hidden power (and the fear and respect it engenders).

#### The Theories of High Magic

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;To understand High Magic, one must fully understand the elves. Prom birth, they are part of a communal tribe, community, and race that shares a subconscious mental link. They can boost this link through magic and other rituals to actually become of one mind and spirit with other elves of like attitudes. In fact, elven reverie is both a reflection on one elf's life and likewise a meditation on all the lives of the elves of a tribe or community.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;All elves also feel a pull toward the elven homeland of Arvandor, the home of the Seldarine, and this pull grows stronger with the passing centuries. It is not so much a call by the gods to pull elves to their sides but a yearning for all elves to journey to Arvanaith, the hidden homeland realm of the elves in Arvandor. In Arvanaith, according to belief, all elves become of one mind and one spirit with the gods.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In all, this ability to be part of a greater whole and link one mind with many is discretely elven. High Magic both interferes with and fulfills the needs of exceptional elves by allowing them to touch the Weave and become part of its greater whole while still in mortal realms. Given the length of time involved in learning High Magic for the defense of the elven realms, an elf must ignore the call of Arvandor and remain on {PLANET} far beyond the years when many elves move beyond. In essence, High Magic and its learning is a conscious decision to delay one's movement to Arvandor by relegating the need and longing for the mental communion of Arvanaith into High Magic workings.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;On a basic level, elven High Magic illustrates the most fundamental difference between humanity and elvenkind. The magic that humanity is capable of mastering without the gods' decree is individual in nature, and the wizard has only to rely on himself and his knowledge for this power, In only exceedingly rare cases can humans' magic be worked among more than one caster, and this requires trust and cooperation, things the elves believe humans have in only limited amounts. Elven magic, on the other hand, relies on cooperation and community, and High Magic depends on that unequivocally. Culturally, humans stress "every man for himself," while the elves' culture embraces the idea of "all for one and one for all;" their magics reflect those very same ideals.

#### The Purpose of High Magic

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While High Magic separates an elf from his fellows and severs some of the sacred ties with Arvanaith and Arvandor, both the High Mage and the elves understand it is for the greater good of both the Mage and the community. High Magic's primary use is the protection and support of the Weave, the forces of nature, and for the betterment of the elves, all of whom are dedicated to physically and magically supporting those same goals, albeit less directly. High Magic may create mythals to protect cities and gates to allow instantaneous transport across the planet, or allow elves to grow majestic buildings and walls around their sylvan cities. However, High Magic also (and far more frequently) is used to prevent droughts and blight from destroying forest glades, slow or speed the flow of rivers or winter run-off to prevent (or sometimes cause) floods, and work with the magics inherent in the planet to find large-scale problems and solve them for the Weave and all the races of {PLANET}, since the Weave cannot do so itself, and the mortal races cannot ignore the immediate to see the inevitable.

#### High Magic Loss or Abuse

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The communion of the elves and their spirit is one of the primary reasons they alone have High Magic. High Magic depends on the unity of mind, spirit, emotion, and sense of self and community within the High Mage and his surroundings. If a large number of elves are at odds with their community or a High Mage, the emotional conflict can sometimes spill into the Weave and disrupt a ritual, causing even powerful High Magic to fail. Dissension among the elves makes High Magic nearly impossible, for it relies on supportive power from the surrounding community on many occasions. It is a measure of elven solidarity that this has rarely happened since the Crown Wars and the Descent of the Drow. Even antagonists can work together for the greater causes, allowing High Magic to flow among them, as was evidenced during the raising of the mythals at Myth Dyraalis and {CAPITAL_CITY}.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;It is this need for cultural and communal togetherness that makes many theorize (and secretly thank the Seldarine, the Weave, and Mystra) that the Dark Elves are denied High Magic. Given their almost-human individualization and constant strife, the drow can never achieve the oneness their surface brethren can with the Weave. However, given their array of other powers, the drow have achieved a link with another power source of sorts. While the original Dark Elves from before the Crown Wars were merely dusky elves with pale hair, the drow of the Underdark have, over the millennia of exile, darkened to obsidian and taken on their more familiar visages as enemies. And many shudder when they hear tales that the drow are trying to create some sort of fell analogue of High Magic to replace what they do not have.

### The Forms of High Magic

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Like many forces, High Magic is both one thing and many. In its fullest essence, High Magic is the direct energy of the Weave, the web of energy that sustains the planet's life (and that of every living being upon it) and provides the source of magic for both wizards and High Mages. Whereas wizardly magic pulls an infinitesimal bit of energy out of the Weave to harness its effects, High Magic maintains the Weave but redirects and manipulates the local flow of energy to achieve the effects of the ritual.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Three types of High Magic rituals are known, all of which tap the Weave, but each draws upon a different level of power, as shown by the number of casters.

#### Rituals of Solitude

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;These most basic forms of High Magic are spell rituals that are performed by only one caster. They are low-level effects (in terms of directly touching the source of all magic and life) that can be harnessed without immediately endangering the caster or the target of the spell/rite. The quickest of castings, these rituals are usually cast in 10-20 rounds.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While this appears similar to standard wizard spellcastings (one caster), "solitude" is misleading, for all High Magic ceremonies tie the caster with the target of the power subliminally (from the target's perspective). The caster reaches through the Weave to connect with the target of the ritual in order to effect these simplest of High Magics. On a remote but very basic level, many wizard spells such as magic missile work on this principle, though wizards are taught that line of sight is the important feature (and the spells are crafted to rely on such).

#### Rituals of Complement

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The mid-range High Magic rituals requires three High Mages to cast different parts of the ceremony for the High Magic to be tapped and controlled. These rituals link the trio together in a conscious sharing of minds while each performs a particular (or, in some cases, identical) ritual within the larger ceremony. Each of the Mages drops all mental defenses in order to take part in a multiperson ritual such as this; they all share their knowledge and perception of the ritual's workings, and they experience the wonder that at least (for High Mages) approximates the ascension the elves feel upon entering the Oneness of Arvandor and Arvanaith.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rituals of Complement are more complex and longer than the lesser rituals and on average take at least an hour or longer to cast. During this entire time, the casters are mentally linked and casting in unison. While not all of the elves are casting at once, they can communicate and read each others' minds, though they do the latter only if invited. Anyone who would use such an intimate bond to reap knowledge or power is either immediately outcast from the clan and all elven contact (a fate worse than death!) or killed outright. If another High Mage were to do so disruptively during a casting, the High Magic would treat that caster as if he had breached the Ritual Wards with all three versions of the backlash defenses; should he survive that, one set of the previous consequences is imposed.

#### Rituals of Myriad

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;These are the most powerful magics cast on {PLANET} by mortals; while the humans contest this with the wish spell as evidence, High Mages contend that the effects of that not-inconsiderable spell are extremely local and individual and often fall under the attentions of some divine agent. The Myriad rituals of High Magic are the titanic sorceries of which legends are born, and woe upon the enemy who forces the elves to unleash these forces.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Rituals of Myriad require a team of at least five High Mages at the casting's center, in the identical manner used in Rituals of Complement, with all the attendant dangers and protocols. Myriad-level High Magic takes far more time to cast, due to many factors. Extended preparation and purification rites open the ceremonies, and these cleansings take nearly as long as a Ritual of Complement in itself. Once the site of the central casting and all the extended casting sites for all the other secondary casters are purified and readied, there is a delicate opening liturgy cast by the central caster that links the secondary (and any subordinate casters or link supporters) to the primary caster at the spell's center. Once all five (or most often, nine, with a quartet of tertiary High Mages casting a supporting rite) casters are linked and focused, the casting of the ritual actually begins. Depending on the ritual, Myriad High Magic can occur in as little as three hours or could last from dawn until dusk of the following day.

#### Ritual Supporters

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Unmentioned factors to High Magic workings must be noted, as they involve the other elves of the realm that the High Mages support. It is quite the point of honor and pride for many elves to be included thusly in a ritual, and a few elves brag of their role in old rituals. Of course, bragging for an elf is mentioning something with pride more than twice in a single decade.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;High Mages often count on diviners to foretell and forewarn them of major portents and events to come. While High Magic was never intended to be used for combat often, it best serves the elves by carefully marshalling power when needed. Thus, the High Mages cannot fall prey to poor planning and mislaid strengths, as did at least one of their predecessors, when lack of preparation and lack of High Magic led to the death of the realm of Vedrymmell.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;In addition, there is a potential role for nearly all folk of {CAPITAL_CITY} or {REALM} to play in High Magic workings. Myriad rituals draw upon a great amount of power and are massively taxing upon all the casters of the ritual - draining for the secondary and tertiary casters and potentially life-threatening for the primary caster. Therefore, many of the Myriad rituals allow the casters to draw upon energy and mental support from normal elf wizards who volunteer to passively join the link and freely offer up energy (and spell memory) to sustain and bolster the High Mages. This allows the High Mages the luxury to concentrate on the ritual without having to worry about keeping their bodies functioning (breathing, heartbeat, etc.). The support from these volunteers further grants the secondary casters the freedom to monitor and adjust the major working of the central caster; for example, when casting a mythal, the primary caster weaves the primary framework, but the secondary casters determine its final breadth and many effects. Without the energy of their brethren, none of the casters could afford the attention to finer points, and High Magic would be far rougher. Finally, from the supporters' point of view, it allows many normal elves a chance to participate in a magic they don't normally experience until they pass to the realm beyond.

#### Ritual Wards

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While the chances are slim in {REALM} of anyone attempting to disturb a High Magic Ritual, the few intrusive rabble-rousers who have tried over the centuries have found the results not to their liking. As part of the opening ritual of any High Magic, the High Mage cleanses and purifies the site where the casting will occur; this defines a boundary or ward surrounding the caster and most often the target as well. The greater the casting, the wider the cumulative ward radius surrounding the casters (10-foot radius per caster involved), though these wards don't impede casters within a ritual. The invisible ward prevents all interruptions and intrusions (physical, magical, psionic, or other) within the area of casting that are not part of the casting (such as supporters lending mental energy). The ward disappears at the end of a ritual.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The wards contain hit points equal to those of the primary caster, combined with his Intelligence and Wisdom scores. The wards are treated as a physical AC and mental AC of 20; should these borders be subjected to pressure by spell, psionics, or force, they crackle into visibility as an energy sphere radiating out from the High Mages. Should the wards be disturbed while a ritual is in progress, there are dire effects for the intruder (all are allowed saving throws vs. death magic for half effect):

- **Physical Intrusion** (physically piercing or crossing the wards): A 50-foot-long 20d6 *arcane bolt* (visually similar to a *lightning bolt* but with no known defenses against it) rebounds from the point of contact straight back along the contact trajectory (accounting for missiles); if any physical body actually touches or penetrates the ward (with a body part or with a hand-held weapon), the above damage hits the intruder and throws him 1d20 feet outside the ward.
- **Magical Intrusion** (casting a spell through the wards, attempting to magically pass through wards, etc.): The magical intrusion is instantly traced back to its caster (via emanations in the Weave) and the caster (whether an actual caster or an item wielder) is subject to a *sink* spell.
- **Mental or other Intrusions** (ethereal, astral, or psionic attempts to breach/bypass the wards): The intruder (or the caster of the intrusion) is subject to a *trap the soul* spell effect, and the intruder is either absorbed into a small gem created instantly by the ward magic or into the High Mage's *selu'kiiru*. Newly created gems float in the air within the ward and zip unerringly into the hand of the primary caster upon cessation of the ritual.

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;The effects are the same if such attempts are made during a Ritual of Complement or a Ritual of Myriad, but the saving throws vs. the effects suffer -3 and -5 penalties, respectively. Only a carefully worded wish spell or other High Magic allows anyone or anything to breach these ritual wards with impunity (i.e., no harmful effects visited upon intruders).

### To Wield High Magic

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;High Magic is puissance as rarely embraced among the elves as wizard magic is embraced among humanity. It is a path of learning, power, and self-discovery that few tread, but those who do touch aspects of the elven nature that most find only when they pass beyond to Arvanaith. High Magic grants elves the power to aid the Weave by supporting the natural world that sustains it; in return, High Magic helps preserve the elves' presence among the mortal realms. High Mages help shape the Weave of {PLANET} and concentrate it at various places to create mythals and gates and other great magics. Finally, High Magic allows its wielders to experience the joys of the oneness of Arvanaith through their links to the Weave, as their own abilities and learning prevent them from experiencing it firsthand, forever separating them from their comrades for the good of all.

#### Education and Learning

&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Just as he is separated from his comrades for his training in wizardly magic, a student of High Magic must undertake a voluntary apprenticeship to a High Mage (who must be at least 900 years old). This apprenticeship lasts for approximately 75 years, though it can last longer; in fact, if a dualist wizard or a multiclassed wizard were accepted for High Magic education, his training might take about 100 years, since his grasp of wizard magic is likely neither as keen nor as broad as is necessary to grasp the basics of High Magic.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;While the finer points of a High Mage's education are cloaked in secrecy, enough elves have witnessed some of the practices of apprentices to get a broad view of the elements of training. Students are taught meditative techniques to allow themselves to more readily feel, see, and sense the Weave around and within them. In essence, the apprenticeship teaches the students to look beyond the physical world without the use of spells or other devices. The ability lies in many an elf, but those with the industry to learn wizardry do not necessarily have the diligence to sit patiently and learn to see what the Weave teaches them unconsciously every day.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;An apprentice's exercises entail reflection and looking at the world with new eyes - a difficult task for elves of this age. By concentrating on the flow of water, an elf can learn how and where it moves, what forces are at play within it, and how any intervention affects that flow. Once students master that, they learn the same about wood smoke, meditating in a smoke lodge for months or years at a time until they can track the tiniest cinder into the sky above the trees. By the time a student learns to see the flow of incense, then wind, and then heat, he begins to see hints of the Weave. Students then learn to focus on the sun, moon, and other celestial bodies. They study each in turn, watching them rise and set, following the flow of light, energy, and the many forces set forth by each in succession.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;By the time an elf has endured 40 to 60 years of training, he may begin to learn the patterns that are the Rituals of High Magic. The teaching of these Rituals is an intensely guarded secret, though the performance of them is not, since they are obvious in effect, once begun; apparently, more magic is always inherent in the ritual than is visible or understandable to noncasters. There are hints that the things learned in the latter half of apprenticeships are such secrets as true names of animals and folk, the location of places of power across {PLANET}, and ways to unravel wizard magic after it is cast (rather than preparing counterspells ahead of time).

---
